---
title: Kerala backwaters
byline: By Anjali Menon
deck: A network of brackish lagoons, parallel to the Arabian Sea.
contentType: Photo Essay
---

The Kerala backwaters are a network of brackish lagoons and canals running parallel to the Arabian Sea along the Malabar coast of Kerala state in south-western India. It also includes interconnected lakes, rivers, and inlets, a labyrinthine system formed by more than 900 km (560 mi) of waterways, and sometimes compared to bayous. The network includes five large lakes linked by canals, both man made and natural, fed by 38 rivers, and extending virtually half the length of the Kerala state. The backwaters were formed by the action of waves and shore currents creating low barrier islands across the mouths of the many rivers flowing down from the Western Ghats range. In the midst of this landscape there are a number of towns and cities, which serve as the start and end points of backwater cruises. There are 34 backwaters in Kerala. Out of it, 27 are located either closer to Arabian Sea or parallel to the sea. The remaining 7 are inland navigation routes. The backwaters have a unique ecosystem: Freshwater from the rivers meets the seawater from the Arabian Sea. A barrage has been built near Thanneermukkom, so salt water from the sea is prevented from entering the deep inside, keeping the fresh water intact. Such fresh water is extensively used for irrigation purposes. Many unique species of aquatic life including crabs, frogs and mudskippers, water birds such as terns, kingfishers, darters and cormorants, and animals such as otters and turtles live in and along the backwaters. Palm trees, pandanus shrubs, various leafy plants, and bushes grow alongside the backwaters, providing a green hue to the surrounding landscape. Hydrography National Waterway 3 from Kollam to Kottappuram covers a distance of 205 km (127 mi) and runs almost parallel to the coastline of southern Kerala facilitating both cargo movement and backwater tourism. Vembanad, covering an area of 2,033 km2 (785 sq mi), is Kerala's largest lake. The lake has a large network of canals that meander through the region of Kuttanad. The important rivers from north to south are the Valapattanam 110 km (68 mi), Chaliyar 169 km (105 mi), Kadalundipuzha 130 km (81 mi), Bharathappuzha 209 km (130 mi), Chalakudy 130 km (81 mi), Periyar 244 km (152 mi), Pamba 176 km (109 mi), Achankovil 128 km (80 mi), Meenachil 75 km (47 mi), and Kalladayar 121 km (75 mi). Other than these, there are 35 more small rivers and rivulets flowing down from the Ghats. Most of these rivers are navigable up to the midland region, in country crafts. Vembanad Lake is the longest backwater in Kerala, as well as the longest lake in India. The Kochi city, Kuttanad, Kumarakom, and Pathiramanal Island are located in this long backwater. The Vellayani Lake, the Pookode Lake, and the Sasthamcotta Lake are the freshwater lakes in Kerala. Sasthamcotta is the largest among them. The Kerala backwaters host three of the world’s Ramsar Convention-listed wetlands: Ashtamudi Lake, Sasthamkotta Lake, and the Vembanad-Kol wetlands are noted as being wetlands of international importance. Tourism Houseboats Kettuvallam (Kerala houseboats) in the backwaters are one of the prominent tourist attractions in Kerala. More than 2,000 of these ply the waterways. The Kerala government has classified the tourist houseboats as platinum, gold, and silver. The Kettuvallam were traditionally used as grain barges, to transport the rice harvested in the fertile fields alongside the backwaters. Thatched roof covers over wooden hulls, 100 ft (30 m) in length, providing protected from the elements. At some point in time, the boats were used as living quarters by the royalty. Converted to accommodate tourists, the houseboats have become floating cottages having a sleeping area, with western-style toilets, a dining area and a sit out on the deck. Most tourists spend the night on a houseboat. Food is cooked on board by the accompanying staff—mostly having a flavour of Kerala. The houseboats are of various patterns and can be hired as per the size of the family or visiting group. The living-dining room is usually open on at least three sides providing a grand view of the surroundings, including other boats, throughout the day when it is on the move. It is brought to a standstill at times of taking food and at night. After sunset, the boat crew provide burning coils to drive away mosquitoes. Ketuvallam are motorised but generally proceed at a slow speed for smooth travel. All Ketuvallam have a generator and most bedrooms are air-conditioned. At times, as per the demand of customers, electricity is switched off and lanterns are provided to create a rural setting Beypore, located 10 km (6.2 mi) south of Kozhikode at the mouth of the Chaliyar River, is a famous fishing harbour, port and boatbuilding centre. Beypore has a 1,500-year tradition of boatbuilding. The skills of the local shipwrights and boatbuilders have widely sought after. Ferry services Regular ferry services connect most locations on both banks of the backwaters. The Kerala State Water Transport Department operates ferries for passengers as well as tourists. It is the cheapest mode of transport through the backwaters. Resorts Ashtamudi lake, which was a sleepy destination for years, has been transformed into a busy tourist destination with plush resorts around the Lake and the backwaters. Under the "Jeevananu Ashtamudi, Jeevikkanam Ashtamudi" initiative, Kollam Corporation has introduced upgrades like musical fountains, floating gardens, electric boats, and biodiversity circuits, enriching the backwater tourism experience while reducing environmental impact. Impact on ecosystem The unregulated proliferation of motorised houseboats in the lakes and backwaters has raised concerns regarding the adverse impact of pollution from diesel engines and outboard motors on the fragile ecosystem. Economic significance Connected by artificial canals, the backwaters form an economical means of transport, and a large local trade is carried on by inland navigation. Fishing, along with fish curing, is an important industry. Kerala backwaters have been used for centuries by the local people for transportation, fishing and agriculture. The region has supported the efforts of the local people to earn a livelihood. In more recent times, agricultural efforts have been strengthened with the reclamation of some backwater lands for rice growing, particularly in the Kuttanad area. Boat-making has been a traditional craft, so has been the coir industry. Kuttanad region is crisscrossed with waterways that run alongside extensive paddy fields, as well as fields of cassava, banana and yam. The crops are grown on the low-lying ground and irrigated with fresh water from the canal and waterways connected to Vembanad lake. Palakkad, the granary of Kerala, lies on the bank of Bharathappuzha river. Thrissur-Ponnani Kole Wetlands are fertile. Ponnani Kole Wetlands lie on the bank of Biyyam backwater. The area is similar to the dikes of the Netherlands, where land has been reclaimed from the sea and crops are grown. Ecological significance Vembanad Wetland is included in the list of wetlands of international importance, as defined by the Ramsar Convention for the conservation and sustainable use of wetlands. Boat races Chundan vallams or snake boats are narrowboats over 100 feet (30 m) long, with a raised prow that stands 10 feet (3.0 m) above water and resembles the hood of a snake. Traditionally these were used by local rulers to transport soldiers during waterfront wars. In modern times, it has spawned a new sport – the Vallam Kali (boat race). Each Chandan vallam accommodates about a hundred muscular oarsmen. Boat races are occasions of great excitement and entertainment with thousands gathered on the banks to watch and cheer. Most of these races are held in the Kuttanad Region The boat races starts with Champakulam Moolam Boat Race which is held on the Pamba River in the village Champakulam on Moolam day (according to the Malayalam Era M.E) of the Malayalam month Midhunam, the day of the installation of the deity at the Ambalappuzha Sree Krishna Temple. When Jawaharlal Nehru visited Kerala in 1952, four traditional Chundan valloms went to receive him. A snake boat race was organized for him. He was so impressed that when he went back to Delhi, he sent back a gleaming silver trophy for a boat race. Even today, the 1.5 km Nehru Trophy Boat Race is the most prestigious. The Thazhathangadi boat race held every year on the Meenachil river, at Thazhathangadi, Kottayam is one of the oldest and most popular boat races in the state. In 1956, emperor of Ethiopia, Haile Selassie visited Thazhathangadi during his imperial tour of India, and witnessed the boat race. Subsequently winners of the race were given the Haile Selassie Ever rolling trophy. Other renowned boat races are: Indira Gandhi Boat Race, Champakulam Moolam Boat Race, Aranmula Uthrattadi Vallamkali, Payippad Jalotsavam, Kallada Boat Race and Kumarakom Boat Race. Backwater regions Kuttanad Important in the ancient history of South India, Kuttanadu is a region spanning the Alappuzha and Kottayam districts; it is well known for its vast paddy fields and geographical peculiarities. The region is the lowest lying of any in India and is one of the few places in the world where farming is carried around 1.2 to 3.0 metres (4 to 10 ft) below sea level. Four of Kerala's major rivers—the Pamba, Meenachil, Achankovil, and Manimala—flow into the region, and it is well known for its boat races. Vembanad Lake, the largest lake in Kerala is at the heart of Backwater tourism, with hundreds of kettuvallams plying it and with numerous resorts on its banks. The Kumarakom Bird Sanctuary is located on the east coast of the lake. The major occupation in Kuttanadu is farming, with rice the most important agricultural product; it is the major rice producer in the state. This activity gives the area its moniker of "The Rice Bowl of Kerala". Large farming areas near Vembanad Lake were reclaimed from the lake. In 2013, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations formally declared the below-sea-level farming system in Kuttanad as Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems (GIAHS). Kollam Kollam (earlier known as Quilon) was one of the leading trade centres of the ancient world, eulogised by travellers such as Ibn Battuta and Marco Polo. It is also the starting point of the backwater waterways. The Ashtamudi Kayal, known as the gateway to the backwaters, covers about 30 per cent of Kollam. Sasthamcotta Kayal, the large freshwater lake is 28.5 km from Kollam city. Islands of Kollam The islands are some of the most eye‑catching and beautiful features of Lake Ashtamudi, Kollam. Most of these islands are potential tourism spots in the state. The Indian Railways also planning to develop one of the islands in Kollam for a tourism project. There are both large and small islands, some inhabited and others uninhabited. There are more than 15 islands in Ashtamudi Lake. The important islands in Kollam are: Munroe Island Chavara Thekkumbhagom Perungalam St. Sebastian Island San Thome Island Pezhumthuruth
